# The minimalistic rouziclib-based picture viewer
A minimalistic picture viewer that shows how to make a simple program using [rouziclib](https://github.com/Photosounder/rouziclib). The entire code that is specific to the image viewer is contained in the function `image_viewer()`, the rest is generic and can serve as the basis for any other program. In the future I might make a more fully featured version in parallel to the minimalistic one, with threaded loading and other useful features.

If you'd like to just use it download the latest binary (Windows only) [here](https://github.com/Photosounder/rouziclib-picture-viewer/releases).

### Features
As you can figure from reading the code of `image_viewer()` the only features present that are specific to this function are loading an image from the command-line argument (which is how you can double click on a file and have this viewer open it directly), loading an image from drag-and-drop onto the window and loading the previous or next image in the image's current folder either with the arrow keys or the mouse scroll. The loading isn't threaded, which sucks for large images, but I didn't want to complicate this minimalistic example with threading, that will come later. There is also a window that contains a knob for what I call "parabolic gain", this both demonstrates the elegance of the markup-based GUI system of rouziclib as well as the sophistication of its drawing queue and OpenCL-based graphics system.

#### Image features
What's more interesting is the features inherent to rouziclib. Images in JPG, PNG, TIFF or even PSD formats can be loaded with no external dependencies, in 8, 16 or 32-bit per channel. They are then internally turned from a naive and simple raster format to a tiled mipmap structure. What this means is that if you load an image that is 20,000 x 13,000 pixels, the GPU will never have to struggle with the whole picture, instead it will only deal with the few 512 x 512 px tiles of the correct zoom level that it currently needs to display, with everything nicely antialiased. As it is the format specified is `IMAGE_USE_SQRGB`, a [10 to 12-bit per channel format](https://photosounder.com/michel_rouzic/#sqrgb), which is fast and good enough but could easily be switched to `IMAGE_USE_FRGB`, a 32-bit float per channel format which conserves the full quality and range (even out of range values) of the original image.

#### Display features
In rouziclib's OpenCL graphics system every pixel is computed in isolation on the GPU from a list of tasks (the drawing queue) which allows for interesting features such as "brackets" which function as an equivalent of brackets in mathematics, so in the case of applying parabolic gain to boost the brightness, only what was drawn inside the bracket, in this case the image's tiles, are affected, while the rest of the interface elements are untouched. The intermediary pixel values are in 32-bit floating point format, but they are never saved to memory as such. Instead at the end of a single pixel's processing the pixel value is converted to 8-bit sRGB with a subtle random dynamic Gaussian dithering applied. That dithering, which changes every frame, 60+ frames per second, effectively gives us a visual colour bit depth superior to the 8 bits our graphic cards and monitors give us. So if you load a 16 or 32-bit per channel image you will be able to enjoy the lack of banding and superior colour precision that you would expect if our computers and software were capable of higher bit depths.

#### Zooming
You'll notice that there seemingly is no zooming function implemented. There's simply no need for that, everything zooms, the image together with the interface elements. Everything is on a quasi-infinite plane onto which your screen is a movable window. Just click the middle mouse button (or Alt-Z) to enter or exit the mouse zoom-scroll mode, long press (0.5 second) the middle mouse button (or press Shift-Alt-Z) to reset to the default view. This zoom-scroll mode makes your mouse cursor be locked in the middle of the window while the mouse moves the whole view, and the mouse wheel zooms in or out (Alt-Q and Alt-E). This is a superior approach to anything else, mostly for viewing large images or large amounts of data, and generally for editing.

I wouldn't want to see a web browser based on this, but serious editing programs would do well to copy this. The downside is that it makes large images almost disappointing. Typically you would be setting zoom levels using a zoom mouse cursor (what a stupid idea) or a zoom slide, and then struggle either with scroll bars or a hand mouse cursor that would only allow you to scroll one fraction of your window's size at a time (such ideas inherited from the 1980s really need to die), that made exploring a large image an adventure, a painful one, but an adventure nonetheless. By being able to quickly and painlessly zoom as far as needed and scroll endlessly (you can take your mouse for a walk and it will keep on scrolling continuously and endlessly across the image as it drags on the ground), you quickly feel like what you used to consider overkill resolution (by virtue of being much higher than your screen's resolution) is actually not that deep nor detailed, you want to keep zooming in onto details only to find that even your 30,000 x 20,000 image isn't as detailed as you'd like. Either way this mean that this humble viewer is the best way to dive into highly detailed images, even if they ultimately leave you underwhelmed.

#### Interface features
Now that I've explained how the mouse zoom-scroll mode works, we can use it to have a look at the window I hid to the right of the image display area. When you see it click onto the pin control in the upper left corner of the window, it will make the window keep its current position and size on the screen, place the window wherever you want with whatever size you want and it will follow you as you move around or zoom in and out. This window contains a knob that controls the brightness, but let's talk about the control itself and its features. Click on it and move the mouse up or down, it changes the value, and while we're at it please notice how the image's brightness is corrected utterly smoothly and instantaneously (thanks to it being calculated in real time using the drawing queue system outlines earlier). But notice how your mouse cursor disappears. I don't know why I've never seen anyone else do this, it allows you move the control endlessly, without having to worry about the edges of the window or screen getting in the way. It's tempting to call me a genius, but why can't other people also find such simple solutions to such basic problems? You can hold the Shift key to make it change the value more slowly, and even throw in the Ctrl key to slow it even further. And here's what I guess is yet another reason to call me a genius, if you hold the Alt key and move the mouse slightly, the value will increase at a steady and smooth rate that varies depending on how you move the mouse (and you can also use Shift and Ctrl to make that change more slowly). Double clicking resets to the default value, and right clicking allows you to type in a value, but this isn't all, you can type mathematical formulas such as "sqrt 2" or "pi/3" (thanks to my fellow genius who made [TinyExpr](https://github.com/codeplea/tinyexpr/)) and have infinite undo/redo (Ctrl-Z to undo, Ctrl-Y or Shift-Ctrl-Z to redo). Not that this is really needed for this humble brightness control, but it's there everytime you make a knob control.

You might notice the very minimalistic vector typeface used there, it's minimalistic because it's rouziclib's builtin fallback typeface, because it's always nice to be able to display text without having to do anything for it. The program actually first tries to load the more detailed and extensive version of my [vector\_type](https://github.com/Photosounder/rouziclib/tree/master/vector_type), but since it's not there to be found (unless you put it there) then it defaults to [this version](https://github.com/Photosounder/rouziclib/blob/master/rouziclib/vector_type/fallback_font.h) contained in a header. In Photosounder 1.10 I pack the whole typeface (minus the CJK data) into a single [C header](https://github.com/Photosounder/rouziclib/blob/master/vector_type/header/vector_type_fileball.h) that contains a compressed "fileball" (like a tarball except nicer and simpler) which extracts all the files where they're expected. More on that when I do a fancier version of this viewer.

### Coding aspects
#### Dependencies and compilation
We have `minimal_viewer.c` which contains the meat of the program, and we also have `rl.c` and `rl.h`. You could put the contents of both of these files at the top of `minimal_viewer.c`, but then you'd have to recompile all of rouziclib everytime you change something in the viewer's code. By having `rl.c` the library has its own separate reusable compiler object which speeds things up. Just in case it's not clear, rouziclib doesn't need to be precompiled and then linked nor even added to a project, the includes in those two files are all you need.

Now when it comes to including rouziclib, by default rouziclib requires no dependencies, you can make a Hello World program and include the two main rouziclib files and not have to change anything to your compilation options (except perhaps when compiling with MinGW as explained in `rouziclib.h`). This is changed by the defines in `rl.h` which add dependencies. Here we need SDL2 which handles the display, mouse and keyboard input, and we also use OpenCL/OpenGL to have our GPU-accelerated graphics. But that's optional, if we remove those defines it will still compile fine and use software rendering instead, it will just be more laggy, also images wouldn't display because I haven't implemented `IMAGE_USE_SQRGB` displaying in software-only mode.

So with those dependencies we need the SDL2 library and headers, and thanks to [clew](https://github.com/martijnberger/clew) we don't need anything OpenCL-related. On Windows the necessary .lib files are already specified in the code using `#pragma` statements, so you just have to worry about specifying the paths to the headers and .lib files. So edit the .vcxproj file in a text editor and replace every instance of `E:\VC_libs\` with your paths to where SDL2 and rouziclib are to be found. When it's compiled you only need to add `SDL2.dll`, we don't need the GLEW DLL since in my boundless genius I built into rouziclib a drastically cut-down version of GLEW with only the things rouziclib needs. On macOS I guess you only need to add `SDL2.framework` and `OpenCL.framework`, and probably some of the other frameworks that come with the system.

#### How the program is structured
Let's start from `main()` and work our way up. All the code is adapted from a large project where I prototype everything, and since I once made it compatible with Emscripten (so that it could be compiled to JavaScript and be ran in a browser), I kept those aspects. Since Emscripten requires that you define a function as a callback instead of having one main function that runs without interuption from beginning to end, it works both ways. When we're not using Emscripten we have in `main_loop()` the initialisation of the framebuffer structure, SDL system and window, the initialisation of everything related to the mouse zoom-scroll system and the loading of the typeface, and then we have the main loop. The input handling is rather self-explanatory but you wouldn't want to dive into what it does either, you can just take it for granted. Note that we refer to the Return key as `RL_SCANCODE_RETURN`, which is just the same thing as `SDL_SCANCODE_RETURN` (which is itself based on some standard USB keyboard scancodes), the difference is that I can put such things all over rouziclib without having to worry about whether SDL2 is included or not. Then we have the call to `image_viewer()`, the mouse cursor drawing, and then the framebuffer "flip" which is actually when we get everything rendered and displayed on the screen.

#### The GUI layout
I spent years working on a GUI layout system that I can be proud of, so let's look at how it works in `image_viewer()`. The `layout` structure is what stores everything you need, it stores each interface element, and for each interface element it stores all the data that define it, like its type, size and position (every control fits inside a rectangle, also rectangles can be made to fit into other rectangles in various ways, you can even make a control, like a text editor fit inside the rectangle defined by a special spacing character in a string, and every string fits inside a rectangle, there's no end to what can be made to fit inside what all while remaining sensible), which other element its position is linked to, and in the case of text editors and knobs all the specific data, including the undo states. So there's a lot that you don't really have to worry about thanks to how much it takes care of things for you. But the `layout` structure is initialy empty, the `make_gui_layout()` initialises it based on the markup contained in the `layout_src` string array. Here we see that element #0 has an undefined type but is used to define the window that contains any other element. Element #10 is a knob, labeled Gain, with values between 0.01 and 1000, the default being 1, all on a logarithmic scale. The position, dimension and offset that follow are a bit harder to explain, but you kind of don't have to worry about this if you use the layout editing toolbar. To do so you can include the line `gui_layout_edit_toolbar(1);` after `image_viewer();` in the main loop, and inside the program you can zoom-scroll to look for it (it's outside of the screen, to the bottom left).

That toolbar is a bit rough around the edges, but it mostly works. Since it's some of my oldest GUI code it's also not my best, for instance you have to press Return for values to be taken into account. First you'll probably want to pin it so that it follows you around. Once you've selected which layout you want to edit (ours is "Image viewer" as defined in the `make_gui_layout()` call), you can switch to editing mode by pressin F6 on your keyboard, then you can select existing interface elements, see their properties in the toolbar, drag them around to a new position and resize them. You can also create new ones, either by duplicating the selected one, or using the drop down menu. Just be sure to set `Elem ID` first if you care about having sensible IDs. If you do something you shouldn't the toolbar will kindly let you know by crashing everything. When you're done creating and editing things, unpin the toolbar and zoom on the bottom section. It shows you the whole markup for the layout which is generated automatically, and since it's one of my standard text editors you can Ctrl-Z back in time and press `Apply Markup` to revert changes. But mostly you'll want to not touch anything except the button that tells you to copy it as a C literal to the clipboard, and then you can paste it in your code between the `{ }` brackets to have your new layout saved there. That's all you have to do, you do your edits, press the copying button, then paste the whole thing into your code as a replacement of the older block of markup.

And finally to help you massively by doing most of the work for you you should press `Generate C code` then select the generated code above and copy it (with Ctrl-A and Ctrl-C), then paste it in your C code wherever you see fit as a template filed in with the correct IDs filled in and the correct function calls depending on the type of control, as well as some usually good default values, and some variables that you definitely should rename. Most of these functions have return values that tell you somehow if anything's just changed, in case you need that. I haven't documented what control returns which value, but you can figure it out from the rouziclib code, mostly in `text/edit.c` and `gui/controls.c`. [quick\_reference.h](https://github.com/Photosounder/rouziclib/blob/master/quick_reference.h) is a good reference for typical code you might need, mostly the section titled "Controls from text layout".

So in the case of the one control we have, we have the value, `gain`, which is a static double that's initialised with a NAN. When `ctrl_knob()` sees that the value is a NAN it sets it to the default value specified in the markup, that's why you should always initialise knob values with a NAN. And that's it really, the value `gain` is updated a a result of calling `ctrl_knob_fromlayout()` and you can just use that value, or even change it, that's not a problem.

#### The image and its placement
The image, as a tiled mipmap called `image_mm`, is loaded when `path` is set to something, and displayed by `blit_mipmap_in_rect()`. The only question is how do we know where to draw it? First we define a rectangle in world coordinates, which is the coordinates of that quasi-infinite plane that we put things on, and then `sc_rect()` turns it into some pixel positions on the screen. We could create a rectangle element in the layout at let's say ID 20 and then get that rectangle by calling `gui_layout_elem_comp_area_os(&layout, 20, XY0)`, but we need the rectangle to fit the window and whatever aspect ratio it currently has. `zc` is the global structure that contains information about the window and all that world coordinate stuff. `zc.limit_u` tells us what is the half-size of the window at the default viewing coordinates, so if `zc.limit_u` is equivalent to 16 , 9 (as xy coordinates) then that means that the world coordinates of that default viewing rectangle goes from -16, -9 to 16 , 9. I almost always use `make_rect_off()` to define a rectangle, so I'll explain it. The first parameter is the position, here 0 , 0, so we use the macro `XY0`. Then comes the dimension, which is `zc.limit_u` times 2, and then the offset, which is where the position, as a point, exists in relation to the rest of the rectangle. An offset of 0 , 0 would mean that the given position is also the position of the lower left corner of the rectangle, 1 , 1 the upper right corner, and therefore 0.5 , 0.5 gives us the centre. So this creates a rectangle of the size we need, centred around coordinate 0 , 0. Then `blit_mipmap_in_rect()` just figures out how to fit the image inside that rectangle without deforming it.
